Nikhil, Elvis, welcome to Talk Python, you guys.
Hey, it's great to be here.
Yeah, it's awesome to have you here.
You're building some cool products, and Nikhil, you're back on the show.
We spoke to you back in Salt Lake City at Startup Row,
and now your startup is more started,
and I'm really excited to hear about it,
and that's what we're mostly going to focus on this episode,
talking about building Python web apps.
Normally when you say something like that,
a person who is not a web developer would go,
oh, you're building apps with Python, web apps with Python, that's cool.
A web developer would be like, okay, what is that?
That's Python, CSS, HTML, JavaScript, React, etc., SQL.
There's a lot going on normally,
but we can winnow it down a little bit and have a little more focus.
When we say Python web apps, it's a little more like that, right?
Yeah, definitely.
I think a lot of people, when they hear Python web apps,
they think of Django, Flask.
They call themselves Python web frameworks,
and they're really great frameworks.
But like you mentioned, there's a lot of things that go into web development.
There's front-end, back-end hosting, etc.
And when you think of frameworks like Django, Flask,
they do a great job of handling the back-end, the database,
the kind of connection layer.
But like you mentioned, when you have to write the front-end,
you end up having to kind of go back to HTML, React, JavaScript,
and the traditional tools.
And generally in web development,
you'll set up your back-end as kind of one service,
your front-end as one service,
hook them up through some sort of API and develop through that.
And it works great,
but one part, like you mentioned,
is there's a lack of unification.
So when it comes to building an app,
you have to piece together a front-end, a back-end,
then figure out how to host it.
So a really big part of why we started Reflex
was to kind of simplify all these different layers of web development
into one batteries-included framework.
And one of the biggest challenges,
along with the batteries included,
is having everything built in,
but also keeping it flexible enough, right?
Because people want to do all sorts of stuff
with their web apps.
So that's really one of the main challenges
that we faced going through all this
was how can we make a framework
that people can just get started,
but it doesn't box them in.
They can still make all the stuff
they were going to make using their JavaScript apps.
Right.
That is the big challenge.
And we're going to dive into that.
You guys got some awesome stuff.
But before we do,
maybe it's been two years or so
since you've been on the show.
Give a quick introduction,
just who you are,
how you got here.
So yeah, I'm Nikhil.
I'm co-founder here at Reflex.
Last time we chatted was about a year and a half ago.
At that time,
our company name was Pinecone with a Y.
That was at Startup Row.
And our mission when we started,
and even now,
is to just simplify the whole process
of web development
from front-end, back-end, hosting,
all these parts,
and make a framework
that simplifies all these parts
so a newcomer can easily
share their ideas
without getting all caught up
in learning new tools,
learning new languages,
boilerplate,
and all this.
So that's been our goal from the start.
And maybe just some background
on why we even came to this idea.
So prior to working on this,
I was working at a self-driving car startup
and then I was working at Apple.
And at both these roles,
I was working on AI teams
with really talented engineers.
But we were all Python engineers.
So we could do anything with database,
backend, all this stuff.
but when it came to something
as simple as make a UI for this app,
make a dashboard to showcase this data,
you know, make a little form
to submit it,
you know, there's sometimes
these senior engineers would be like,
okay, that's not my domain.
I can't do that in Python.
You know, someone else can handle this.
Sure, I have a PhD in machine learning,
but I can't build a website.
So now what?
Exactly.
And that's kind of where we are.
And a big reason of that is
if you think about, you know,
different languages
and their use cases,
Python is used in so many,
it's one of the most broad languages.
if you think about all the areas it's used,
backend, databases, AI, ML,
all these areas,
but there's really one place
that it's not used traditionally.
And that's kind of front-end development.
And for there, like JavaScript is king.
And if you take the inverse of that
and think about JavaScript,
it's one of the most popular languages
in the world, right?
Like it's one, two, or three up there.
And if you think about the use case for it,
it's mostly all around web applications.
So what we see,
what we kind of notice is,
you know, people love Python.
They want to do all their work in Python
when it's accessible.
And people love web development
and they use JavaScript
because they love web development,
but there's not much usage of JavaScript
outside that domain.
So really our big focus was,
well, can we fill in this gap
in the Python ecosystem
where people are doing everything in Python
and then suddenly this one domain
of websites, front-ends,
that can't be handled
and they need to, you know,
use a different tool,
use a different language,
outsource that.
And that was a big thing
we wanted to solve.
the same people
with the ideas,
building the backend,
building the AI,
building the whatever it is,
should be also the people presenting it,
building the UI layer
and kind of sharing their ideas.
Yeah, absolutely.
Many people I talk to
would rather build everything in Python,
but they end up
piecing it together
as they have to.
Elvis, good to see you.
Yeah, same.
Yeah.
Quick introduction about you.
Yeah, so I guess we met at PyBay.
Yeah, we did.
Yeah, so that was very, very fun.
And yeah, so I'm Elvis,
he and his,
I'm working at Reflex
as a developer advocate.
And prior to this,
I was working at Warp.
So I was there like three years
doing like developer experience,
developer relations.
Yeah.
Shout out to Warp.dev, man.
That is an awesome terminal.
I really enjoy that.
I use that pretty much universally now.
And yeah,
thank you for that recommendation.
It's still going strong.
Yeah, very good team.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, awesome.
So now you're working at Reflex,
formerly Pinecone,
same company, new name.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Yeah, even doing more,
you know,
this Warp is more Rust, right?
So now you're more
in the Python side of things, yeah?
Yeah, but even there,
I was like,
everything that I was building
was like internal tooling
to like optimize developer experience.
And so everything was in Python.
And so that's how I actually
came across Reflex.
And then I was like,
oh, this is a dream,
like being able to like work
in open source
and build Python apps
and like serve the community.
And so when I saw that job posting,
I was like,
whoa, I would love to join.
And they were in SF,
so that was great.
So I could just walk over
to the office and things.
Yeah, that is kind of the magic
of San Francisco, right?
Like it's not you
and potentially a whole family
move thousands of miles away.
It's just you take a different bus
or a different BART train
or something.
Yeah.
Yeah, very cool.
All right.
Well, Nigel,
let's talk really quickly
just about Startup Lane.
You know, like we had,
I was just looking back on this
as I knew you were coming
on the show
and I was like,
well, you know,
what happened to all those companies?
And I don't have a great,
totally good sense.
I know that some of these
have pivoted.
You know, we had Ponder.
We have Generally Intelligent.
We had Wereobots,
Neptine,
Nyxtla,
Pretty Base,
and Pinecone,
which is now Reflex.
And this was,
well, what is this startup row
really quick
while we're on this topic?
Yeah, so.
How'd you get on there?
Yeah, so this was back
when we first started.
I think our company
was maybe one or two months old
and we had just got into,
we were part of the Y Combinator
Winter 23 batch.
So while going through that,
we launched on,
I think, Hacker News
early January
and that's when we first started,
you know,
publicizing our open source,
getting users on it.
And we got quite good traction
when we started
and part of,
one of the events
that was happening
was PyCon,
which was,
I believe,
in April of that year.
And it was a great opportunity
maybe for us
as a Python,
you know,
a Python company,
it like to kind of
meet our audience.
And so,
yeah,
so part of that
was the startup role
where there was a lot of,
you know,
I think seed
or like very early state startups
coming to present.
so at that time
we were maybe only
two months old.
So very early,
but it was still
a great,
really great experience.
You know,
I think it was probably
the first event,
you know,
that we've done
as a company.
So that was a really
good experience
to meet
different Python developers
and to meet
all like the other developers
that,
you know,
the companies you mentioned,
like even ones
that were not,
that aren't listed here.
There's a bunch
of awesome Python people
that came there.
Yeah,
it's not just the companies
that are in startup row.
That's its own special thing.
But the whole expo floor hall
is a pretty awesome place
to just walk and mingle
and learn
what people are up to.
Yeah,
definitely.
yeah,
that's cool.
I know that Ponder,
Ponder got acquired.
So congrats to them.
Oh,
nice.
They got acquired
by Snowflake.
Nice.
Yeah,
that makes a lot of sense.
Yeah.
Yeah,
I know Generally Intelligent,
their founders
are some of our friends.
they're an investor
in our company.
They rebranded now
to Imbue.
So I think
they're doing well as well.
Yeah,
I think whoever put together
that group,
whoever selected
the companies that go there
did pretty good
because,
you know,
startups don't have
typically a huge likelihood
of succeeding,
but I think most of these
are still around.
So that's awesome.
Yep.
Yeah,
cool.
All right.
Well,
let's talk.
We've introduced it
a little bit,
but Reflex,
let me just read,
I'll read the little,
the H1,
the H2 for you
and then we'll go from there.
It has that front end,
back end,
pure Python,
and then the open source
framework to build
and deploy web apps
and no JavaScript required.
There's a lot to unpack there.
So,
you know,
tell people what Reflex is
and then we'll dig
into the use cases
and some of the open source
stuff and so on.
Yeah,
so like we kind of talked
about earlier,
Reflex is a Python framework
to build web apps
in Python
and it's an open source
framework,
so you don't have to sign up
for a SaaS
or do anything.
You just do pip install Reflex,
kind of like what's shown
at the bottom
and you can start using it
like any other Python library.
And like I mentioned,
the key distinction
that we're trying to do
is kind of unify
the whole web stack.
So all the parts
that normally go
into web development,
building a front end,
building a back end,
connecting them,
maybe including a database
and then deploying it,
usually these involve
using several different tools,
technologies,
even often multiple languages
and the overhead for that
could be really high.
So if you think about before
like a full-fledged web app,
usually you're not going
to do that unless you have,
you know,
you have like a mission to do.
Like you have something
you're trying to make,
you have it kind of spec'd out
and you're going to kind of
invest that effort into it.
It's very hard
or most people aren't going to,
you know,
prototype a web app
or kind of build out like that
because the overhead needed
is way too high
to kind of mess around with.
So what generally happens,
especially for Python developers
is they'll use Python scripts,
they'll use Jupyter notebooks
and in the Python community also,
there's other pretty good frameworks,
things like Streamlit, Gradio,
which are also in the Python environment
and I think try to target
a very similar problem
that we're doing where,
you know,
people have their data,
people know Python
and they want to showcase it.
So these are kind of
the existing tools
that were there before we started
and I think they all have their place
to get started with
but they're very limiting
in what you can build with them, right?
Like it's good
for the most basic prototype.
You can have a script,
you can have a Jupyter notebook,
but this is not something
necessarily you'd want to share
within your team
to build up to a larger app.
Like usually once it becomes
a bit more complex,
you hand it off to another team
or if you're brave,
you go learn JavaScript
or something.
But usually there's a point
where it's like,
all right,
I've done my job.
Like someone else,
like go make this production ready.
And a big part of what we're
trying to do different at Reflex
is compared to other Python
and I'd even say other
like non-JavaScript frameworks
is to keep everything in,
you know, Python
in one language
but without having
any of these trade-offs
that usually come with
a low-code or no-code platform.
So usually low-code
and no-code,
they exchange,
you know,
things like performance features,
things like that
for usability.
Customization.
So you can build
a certain subset of apps
but you need to kind of,
you know,
keep your aspirations
confined to what
that framework's going to give you.
Like you want some random component,
you want a mapping component,
you have to hope
that framework has it.
You want to integrate
with a certain database,
you have to, you know,
hope that they're going
to give you that integration.
So one of the very nice things
about Python is for,
especially the backend integrations,
right?
Like, actually,
before that,
let me just back up one second.
So compared to a lot
of these low-code,
our goal was to have
the same framework you use,
you can easily build
to prototype your app,
you know,
in a few hours,
build a quick prototype
of your app
and you can use
that same framework
to then grow your app
all the way
to a production-grade app.
So if you're like,
look at our main website,
reflex.dev,
this entire website
was built in Reflex
so you can kind of see
that badge at the bottom.
I think this is kind of
distinguishing thing
from others.
Like,
usually to build
a website like this,
you would need
to use JavaScript,
but this was entirely
built in Python
and Reflex
and it just goes
to show like
the kind of,
you know,
along what we're chatting
about of,
you can build,
you know,
a basic chat app,
a little prototype app
as kind of is shown
in the demo section
right below
on the landing page
where we have a bunch
of, you know,
different use cases.
So you can build
that prototype,
but you can also extend
that all the way
to a production app
that's, you know,
serving either internal users
or even in our case
for some startups
that are serving
external public users
using Reflex.
Yeah,
a lot of times
when I talk to people
about these kind of apps,
often it's,
like,
we've got an internal app
and there's 20 people
using it
and it doesn't really matter
if it takes a little while
for the app to load up
and, you know,
we're not worried
about SEO
or any of those things,
right?
but to make your
product a landing page
in it,
that's a pretty big deal.
Yeah,
and I'm not saying
that's the typical
or intended use case.
Sure, of course.
Like, you know,
there's other things
if you just want
a static landing page,
but it was more to show
the extent
to which it could be used.
But like you mentioned,
a lot of our,
there's kind of like
two domains of people
that want to use us.
The main audience
is really developers,
engineers,
that are not web devs,
are not JavaScript devs.
So obviously,
that includes,
you know,
hardcore Python people
who are, you know,
senior Python developers.
But a lot,
it's also just like
anyone who knows
a bit of coding
because Python tends to be,
you know,
people have taken
one CS class.
It tends to be
a Python class.
They've learned
a bit of Python.
So we actually see
use cases outside
of even software engineering.
So people in finance,
manufacturing,
biology,
where they,
you know,
before had an Excel
spreadsheet,
but they knew
a little Python
and they're now able
to develop,
you know,
these internal apps
for their companies.
So that's kind of
the developer
profile we're looking at.
And in terms of
the companies
and use cases,
it's a lot of,
you know,
small teams that
they want to do more
with the team they have.
Like they,
like for,
on one hand,
it's kind of startups.
You have a one,
two person startup
and you need to get
your,
you know,
app demoed.
You're building
some AI thing
and you want to get it demoed.
You don't want to go
hire a contractor
or a front-end developer
to build that.
You want to iterate quickly
and kind of work
through that,
especially during
that iteration phase,
right?
Like when you want
to iterate,
you don't even know
fully what you want
to build.
So it's really empowering
to,
or what we're trying
to do is empower people
by giving them a tool
where they can iterate
on their ideas
and not have to depend
on someone else.
Yeah,
I think one of the problems
with the low-code,
no-code stuff
for people in our orbit
is they know code.
They're good developers.
Yeah.
They just might not be
front-end developers
or designers
or whatever.
So I think it's probably
a little frustrating
to work with
like really low-code,
no-code type of stuff
because you're like,
ah,
if I could just program,
there's just a little bit
of code would totally
make this work.
Yeah.
but it's in JavaScript
or it's in something else.
Like,
Elvis,
when you're talking
to people about this,
you know,
like,
how do you present this
versus something like
Retool or Gradio
or something like that?
It's funny
because I was using Retool
at the last company
and one of my frustrations
was...
Yeah,
and they've been
a sponsor of the show.
I think they do make
pretty cool stuff,
but it's different, right?
Yeah,
it is different.
I think Retool
is very powerful.
They have a lot
of plug and play.
I think the,
I think for someone
who's,
if you're coming
from a developer background,
I think you're so used
to having full control
that,
like,
giving some of that
control away
can be a difficult adjustment
and I think one of the
nice things about Reflex
is that
all of these UI components
get transpiled
into React,
right?
And so,
one of the key value props
is that you're bringing
an entire ecosystem
closer
to backend people
and so,
like,
we,
there's a couple companies
that will have someone
doing frontend
and making components
just for their
internal tools team
and it's like,
you can just wrap those
in Reflex
and now,
all of your components
still adhere
to,
like,
your style guide
or to your theme
and so,
you're not really,
like,
limiting people
in terms of,
like,
the components
that they have
available to them
because it is
React under the hood.
Oh,
that's pretty interesting.
Yeah,
it's very elegant
because it turns
into FastAPI
and React
so it's like,
you're not really limited
when it comes to,
like,
producing apps
that can get bigger
or,
like,
scale
or have,
like,
routes and things.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Okay,
that's cool.
So,
it's
basically some developer
tooling on top
of React
and then,
so what you end up
programming is probably
mostly generates React
and then it's also
FastAPI on the back end.
That's really neat.
Yeah,
so,
well,
basically going back to,
as we're developing this,
the most important thing
we kept in mind was,
okay,
we want to make it really easy,
you know,
a newcomer should be able
to build this
but not have,
pretty much have ways
to do anything,
right?
Like,
never make people hit
that graduation point
where they're like,
okay,
I've hit the limits of Reflex,
let's go use a serious framework
like React.
So,
it's very intentional
that people never hit that goal
and,
like,
one way that we achieve that is,
you code everything in Python
but the end output
that it compiles to
is a production-grade web app.
So,
for the front end,
though you're coding it in Python,
the front end will compile out
to a Next.js app.
The back end will compile out
to a FastAPI back end
that hook up together.
So,
it's pretty much
the same architecture
you would write
as if you were writing it by hand.
So,
there's no,
there's,
like,
we're not taking a shortcut
as in,
like,
if you were to write it by hand,
it would actually compile.
you would probably write
a Next.js front end,
FastAPI back end,
and connect it.
And we're kind of giving
a layer on top of that.
And by developing on top of React,
it goes back to this,
you know,
we don't want to reinvent the wheel.
Web dev is a really mature ecosystem.
We're not going to be able to,
you know,
remake React
and all the components out there.
So,
when we started,
so when we started,
our big approach was,
let's wrap React.
And not only,
like,
our,
do our components wrap React,
but we make it very easy
for developers
to wrap their own components.
So,
kind of like what Elvis said,
we have companies,
like,
Fortune 100 companies
that internally,
they have their own React,
you know,
component library
that they must use
for every app
that they're building.
And they were able
to wrap those in Reflex,
and now they can use,
you know,
their private,
custom React components.
One person wrapped it once,
and now any Python developer
is able to access it
and develop with it.
So,
our really big point is,
like,
you're not going to be locked in.
We have,
you know,
60 plus components built in,
but anything that's possible
in React and JavaScript,
you can easily bring that
to Reflex
without waiting for us.
Yeah.
Okay.
So,
there's a bit of an escape hatch
to just go down straight
to React.
Well,
yes,
but the nice part
is you don't have to write
the React directly.
I mean,
you can write it once,
but after that,
we have a third-party
component ecosystem.
I can show you
on our website later as well,
but many people have published
their own third-party components.
Oh,
interesting.
For example,
like,
we don't have a map component
built in.
So,
last week,
someone published
our Reflex map component.
So,
if you want to,
like,
hook up a map
into your thing,
it's now possible.
And there's a lot of these-
AG Grid.
Yeah,
AG Grid,
you know,
audio recording,
and all these,
like,
niche cases,
right,
where we're not going to
able to support it all.
But the nice part
about having an open source
and open source community
is community can add
to the project,
shared with others,
and everyone can benefit
from it.
Cool.
So,
another one of the challenges
of low-code,
no-code type stuff
has to do with the
deployment side of things.
you know,
I maybe buy a
SaaS subscription
at some low-code place,
but,
you know,
in practice,
the,
I don't know,
the performance
is just not good enough
to,
if you put it on the internet,
it'll just not take it
or something like that,
right?
But if it's,
if it's basically
JavaScript over
FastAPI,
like,
that's a very well-known
and super scalable
setup,
right?
Yeah,
exactly.
And,
and so part of that
is in the unification,
it wasn't only front-end,
back-end,
it was also deployment,
which a lot of people,
they build their app
and deployment takes as long,
if not longer,
than the actual building.
And the DevOps
all along the way,
yeah.
Yeah,
especially if you've never
done this,
right?
Like,
to go learn about,
you know,
how to domain names
and what is,
like,
SSL,
what is S3,
like,
all these things
take a long time.
And that,
so,
and going back to the thing
of balancing that thing
of batteries included,
yet,
if you don't want to use
our batteries,
you know,
you should be able
to self-host it.
So,
along those lines,
what we've included
in Reflex is
a one-line deploy.
So,
after you've built your app,
you can just type
Reflex deploy.
We set up all the infrastructure
and you'll get a URL back
that anyone can access
your app through.
So,
we have the actual hosting
service built in
as well to Reflex.
And,
if you don't want to use that,
like many companies,
you know,
say you want to deploy
on your private cloud
or et cetera,
we're really like,
it's really important to us
to stay with like open source
and make it so,
you know,
if you want to use it
in your own use case,
that's always possible.
So,
we have guides
and make it easy
to deploy on all these.
And like you said,
because it's kind of
a standard output,
it's kind of easy
to self-host it yourself
as well.
Right,
right.
What you know about
running FastAPI
probably translates pretty well.
Yep.
What's the database story?
There's got to be
a database,
right?
Yep.
So,
so,
this goes back
to like the whole
batteries yet flexible.
So,
we have a built-in arm
similar to Django.
It's nothing but a kind
of light wrapper
around SQLAlchemy
but kind of hooked up
more to Reflex.
So,
kind of taking care
of some abstractions
in terms of making
the models work
with Reflex state,
et cetera.
So,
the nice part is
we have first-class support
for any SQL database
because of the SQLAlchemy
like tight integration.
So,
when you start Reflex,
you have a built-in
SQLite database
database that gets,
you know,
any app that wants it,
it's there for you.
You don't have to do
any setup.
So,
you can start developing
with databases right away
like without,
you know,
having to learn too much
outside or doing any setup.
And then once you want
to go to,
you know,
production,
deployment,
and you want to use,
say,
Postgres,
MySQL,
or whatever you want
to use for your
actual database,
it's just a matter
of in our config
putting the database
URL that you want.
So,
we make it really easy
to partner
with whatever you're doing.
so a lot of people
use us with providers
like Supabase,
Neon,
where they set up
their database
using one of these
providers and they can
easily connect it
to their app.
Yeah,
that's cool.
So,
basically anything
SQLAlchemy supports,
just set the connection
string and you're good to go.
Yeah,
and along that line,
right,
like a lot of people
ask us follow-up questions
like,
well,
how do you handle
MongoDB?
NoSQL?
How do you handle
like XYZ tool
that I want to use
in my app?
And,
you know,
this is another part
where I think
our big advantage
over low-code,
no-code frameworks
where,
you know,
if you want,
say,
a drag-and-drop builder
to support
your random database,
because there's no code in it,
you're kind of dependent
on them,
right?
Yeah,
yeah,
yeah.
For us,
we kind of have this
kind of nice privilege
where we can say,
hey,
it's just Python.
Go use the Python library.
Anything you can do
in Python,
you can like integrate
in Reflex.
So we give a lot
of first-class support,
but a lot of what we're doing
is we're on the shoulders
of React and Python.
Oh,
interesting.
So if I wanted to use,
say,
Beanie and Pydantic
and MongoDB,
I just do that?
Just do pip install,
whatever the library is,
and use it like any Python.
So,
for example,
like a huge use case
people use us with
is,
you know,
AI apps.
So a lot of people
use OpenAI,
Anthropic,
and all this.
And it's just
the Python library away.
And oftentimes,
they already have written
that Python script first,
right?
And they just want a UI
on top of it.
so it's like even easier
to hook up at that point.
Yeah,
that's very cool.
Elvis,
anything you want to add
to that before we move on?
This whole deployment,
managing,
DevOps-y side of things?
Yeah,
it definitely,
it reminds me of the quote
where like,
any like sufficiently
advanced technology
is like indistinguishable
from magic.
Because like,
like we recently sponsored
CalHacks,
and like being able
to like see people
who are taking like
CS1,
CS2,
like the magic
like in their eyes
and like they can
like run it
and then like a website
comes up.
Like that's,
it's just so compelling,
you know?
And then so like,
for me,
I'm just like looking
forward to the future
where more people
can use it
and then we can just
like make
like the web ecosystem
like more democratized,
you know?
just giving power
to people who like
don't have
a JavaScript experience,
you know?
Yeah,
it's a big part
of the Python story
as well,
right?
You know,
one of the alternatives
to this is notebooks,
right?
Which I know
it's not even close
to the same thing,
but a lot of people
who are not web developers
or just don't want
to take a month
to build a website,
right?
They'll kind of create
a notebook
and use the notebook
to visually communicate
in interesting ways,
right?
But when it comes down
to I want something
that feels like
a website for someone,
it kind of falls short
most of the time
to use a notebook
for that.
Yeah,
but it is,
that has,
sorry,
the reason I brought it up
is notebooks totally
democratized visualization
and interaction
for data scientists
in a way
that was massive.
No,
yeah,
I completely agree
and I think,
I think most people
would agree
like a web interface
is nicer than a notebook,
but a notebook
is so much easier
to build,
right?
So when considering
that trade-off,
people are like,
all right,
here's my Jupyter notebook
and what we're trying
to hope
or what we're trying
to do is make it
as easy to,
okay,
convert your notebook
to a website
that's more easily
shareable,
more easily kind of
deployable
and all this other stuff
and I guess along
those lines,
I think we're going
to chat about it
maybe a bit later,
but our goal,
like right now,
a big part of it
is making,
okay,
you can write your UI
in Python,
right?
So it's making
that part of it
more accessible,
but our goal
is not necessarily,
you know,
to stop at Python.
Our goal is just
to make it easy
for someone with an idea
to build a web app.
So along those
lines,
like as we started,
a lot of the
positive comments
people have said
is okay,
now I can,
you know,
one language,
one framework,
but still,
it's just because
you know Python,
that doesn't suddenly
mean you're a designer,
you're a web developer,
like I can now make,
you know,
an Airbnb style website
just because the HTML
is now in Python.
So a big part
of what we're trying
to do is accelerate
a lot of the entire process
because fundamentally,
I think people have
in their mind,
like they know
what they want to build.
Yeah,
they know what it looks
like in their head.
In their mind,
they can visualize it,
but it's kind of
their technical implementation
and their tool,
like all of those
are not good enough
for what's in their mind
to become reality.
So that's why
they have to settle
for notebooks,
settle for,
you know,
an approximation
of what's in their mind
because they're like,
okay,
this is with my time
and effort and tools.
This is like
what I'm trying to do.
And along those lines,
so I think Python
is definitely
one good aspect of it
because, you know,
it's now in their language.
We're trying to bring it
to where they are.
But there's a lot of stuff
that I think
the whole web dev ecosystem
is going to change
in the upcoming years.
And we want to be part
of this kind of new age
of frameworks
that's incorporating
things like AI
along with code
and kind of that
integration between the two
where a lot of stuff,
you know,
that's easier to do in AI,
it makes sense to do there.
But it's important
that the output of that
is something
that the developer
can understand,
edit,
and kind of work with.
So it's still
their contribution
that's getting,
you know,
built in the end.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's,
I'm skeptical
of many integrations
of AI
into,
I'll say,
most apps.
But I've seen,
I know you're leaning
towards not playing
a little bit.
It's pretty neat.
So yeah,
we'll get to that.
But yeah,
it's pretty empowering
because,
you know,
if you just stare
at a blank screen
of HTML
where it literally
just says
angle bracket,
HTML angle bracket,
body,
now what?
Like,
that's daunting,
you know?
I think that's kind
of the point
we're trying to go after
because there is,
you've probably seen,
like,
there's a lot of AI
website generators
that,
you know,
they'll make
kind of your landing page.
I think there's
two real downsides
to a lot of existing ones
that we're trying
to kind of attack differently.
One is,
they're mostly meant
for static sites,
right?
Like,
they'll give you your thing,
but it's very hard
to add your actual stuff
to it.
and part of that
is they generate
kind of the stuff,
but it's not in a way
that's usable
by the end user.
So you could generate
a nice dashboard interface,
but for a developer,
they're like,
well,
how do I actually
put my data in there?
How do I hook it up
with my database?
How do I actually make
this nice thing
actually practical?
So I think that's
kind of the approach
we're trying to do
is like once,
if we have these AI features,
it's not just an AI to build.
It's something that
the developer can also,
you know,
understand the output with
and work with it.
So it's like Python,
we see as great in this,
in this thing
as like an intermediate language
with which both AI
can kind of write to
and a developer
can actually understand
in the end
compared to an AI
outputting a bunch
of React code,
which would be really hard
for then a Python developer
to actually go make
modifications with.
Yeah,
exactly.
It's write only.
You can't do much
with it after it's created.
Yeah,
exactly.
Cool.
All right,
before we talk,
I want to talk through
some of the little examples
and what code looks like
within the constraints
of a mostly audio show
to the extent that we can do that.
But I want to talk
open source first
because,
you know,
one of the considerations
when you guys said,
hey,
let's circle back
and talk about Reflex.
I'm like,
wait,
I don't know what Reflex is,
but then it's Pinecone,
right?
I'm always a little bit
hesitant to have
just a company
on the show
because I'm afraid
it's just,
well,
we're just going to talk
about our product all day.
But,
you know,
I think there's one,
I feel like
having an option
to write Python code
across the board
is super interesting
for Python people.
There's a few other things
that I've covered previously
that are somewhat like that,
like Anvil is close,
but it has a very different approach
and Streamlit.
Very different approach,
but kind of somewhat,
very slightly sort of similar output,
but not the same for sure.
But also just this,
the fact that you guys have this
also as open source,
I think that that's a,
that's a pretty compelling option.
And so I,
you know,
one of the things I think
this makes it pretty relevant
for people.
And then I looked at the GitHub repository
and it has 20,000 stars.
That's like a third of Flask
or a third of Django.
That's pretty good,
you guys.
Yeah.
I mean,
so when we started,
we always wanted to open source it
from the start.
I think that was like
very,
very important to us.
I think our idea was
I'd rather have,
you know,
a large number of users
and only X percent of them
say on a paid product
than a small number of users
that are all paying.
Like our biggest thing
is all about kind of the community.
And related to that,
I don't think there's been many,
especially in like,
say web frameworks.
I can't really think of
many web frameworks
that are not open source
that have really took off
because a big part of things
like web frameworks
are the ecosystem around it, right?
Like it's not just the framework,
but what are all the stuff
people build on top of it?
Like the integrations,
the components,
the tutorials
and all this stuff around it.
So a big part of
what we wanted to do
was open source it,
make it really easy
for people to get started
and not have a huge like
burden to even,
start and yeah,
pretty much lower
all the activation energy
that someone would need
to get their first app
up and running.
Yeah.
And actually the open source
has really been good.
Like it's been awesome
for our community.
So when we first started
like a year and a half ago,
like people,
what is very surprising to me,
like this is the first time
I've done an open source project,
like, you know,
let an open source project.
and it's,
what was most surprising
in a positive way
was like how many people
are eager to contribute
to open source.
Like I did not expect
when I started,
but like so many people
were like,
hey, can I work on this?
Hey, can I add this feature?
And what's really nice is
like we have our reflex core
stuff that we're working on,
but everyone has a different
use case of what they're
trying to build with it.
Right.
So it's like this balance
of like, okay,
we have a plan of our roadmap.
We're going to add these features.
But then other people will say,
well, I want an audio component
for this and I want this.
And the nice part
about being open source
is we really encourage people
to add their own stuff to it.
When they hit a bug,
a lot of people are like,
all right, it's open source.
I can just go fix the bug.
I don't have to rely
on the maintainers.
So for the,
and like going back to,
you know,
kind of the velocity
because we started around
a year and a half ago
and I think we're getting
pretty good traction
and a lot of that
is because of our great
kind of community
that's been building
a lot for us.
Yeah,
it is an interesting
aspect of choosing
what platform
you want to work with,
right?
Because if it's closed source,
it might be great,
but you're stuck
with whatever you're
going to get,
right?
Maybe,
fingers crossed,
something comes,
but you know,
no promises,
right?
But if it's relatively small,
like a component
or something,
yeah,
then people can add
their own
and that's pretty cool.
Yeah,
that's pretty much
like the,
whenever I'm like
evaluating like tools
to bring into our tech stack,
especially for go-to-market,
one of the first things
I look at is like,
it's like open source
and then their docs
and like they have an API.
Like those are like
my first three
like top tier criteria.
That way,
we're not like
constrained in the future
if the company decides
to pivot
or to change
their roadmap
and things.
Right,
absolutely.
So,
yeah,
pivot,
it definitely could
turn out bad
if it's your platform,
right?
So,
Apache 2 license,
tell me what,
what does that mean
for people who want
to go and build stuff
with us?
Apache 2,
so basically
we wanted to make it
as permissive as possible.
So,
I think the gist of it
is you can kind of
use it for anything
you want,
paid,
commercial,
open source,
whatever it is.
The only restriction,
as far as I understand,
I'm not an expert,
by the way,
so maybe anyone looking
into it,
consult the license themselves.
But I think it's just
you have to like
attribute trademarks
if you're,
you know,
copying the code with it.
But we really wanted
to make it super permissive,
you know,
like let anyone use it
and then build
products on top of it,
like our hosting,
like,
you know,
more premium components,
like built-in auth
that will provide value
for people that are using it
in a,
say,
a business or more,
you know,
production use case.
So the core open source,
it's really important.
Like anyone who wants
to build anything,
like we want to give them
something to start building.
All right.
And so it's always
interesting to me
on one hand
we have a business
and employees.
Two,
we're giving away
our thing.
that turns out
to be a pretty good
business model these days,
but it is a little bit,
you know,
like,
well,
how does that work?
And I think
what you all are offering
is pretty helpful.
Basically,
the real,
in addition to the core product,
right,
the real reason
which you can go
and sign up
at Reflex.dev
is take away
the trouble
of hosting this,
upgrading it,
maintaining it,
patching it,
just push a button
or a CLI command
and then your thing lives,
right?
Exactly,
yeah.
We want to simplify
the process of hosting
because once you build
your app,
you end up having
to host it anyways.
And there's a lot
of clouds out there,
right,
and we have self-hosting guides
so anyone that wants
to can do that themselves.
But a lot of these clouds,
they're configured
to host any type of app,
right,
which is really great
for the cloud
because they can host anything.
But for the user,
it means it ends up
being a lot of configuration,
a lot of setup,
and a lot of overhead
when they just want
to get their app
and share it
with someone.
So one part
of what we're doing
with our hosting service
is one,
making the UX
around it really nice.
So just a simple
deploy command,
your app is up and running.
The second is
we're really able
to optimize our hosting
around Reflex apps
since it's the only type
of app that we host.
We can really optimize,
you know,
the performance,
the cost,
and all these other factors
as well as add a lot
of stuff on top of it.
For example,
in the future,
like analytics
and different stuff
on your app
where that's another add-on
if you're using,
you know,
a third-party hosting.
So there's a lot
of, you know,
plugins on the open source
side,
but there's also,
once you've hosted
your apps,
a lot of things
you end up having
to add in terms
of like analytics,
tracking,
monitoring,
et cetera.
And we have unification
on the kind of framework level,
but also we're going
to have it on the cloud level
where every part
of the framework
and from the front
and back into the hosting
kind of knows
about each other.
Yeah.
So you can probably
get some big machines
and have a multi-tenant database
with good performance,
stuff like that.
Yeah, exactly.
And a big part of,
like there's kind of
two aspects to our hosting.
One is a public cloud,
and you can think
of that similar
to Vercel for Python.
So that's more geared
to say hobbyist startups,
people that want
to build their ideas
shared with the public community.
And another big use case,
which is where
a lot of our app developers
come from,
is the internal app use case.
Sure.
And so that's kind
of another aspect
where we're building tools
to easily deploy
to our internal cloud,
monitor who's accessing
your apps, et cetera.
Okay.
Yeah, I saw that
over on Reflex.dev.
if you go to pricing,
it's basically free
for hobbyists,
coming soon for pro.
Yeah.
You don't have anything
to announce yet, do you?
Yeah.
Basically,
we're working on
our pro hosting service.
So right now,
we have a hobby,
so anyone can kind of deploy
a few apps for free.
But our pro is going
to have features
like custom domains,
ability to configure
your machines,
multi-region,
and make it actually like-
Let's Encryb, probably.
Yeah, yeah.
SSL, all that.
So actually making it kind of,
you know,
able to serve more users.
Yeah, nice.
I'm pretty fascinated
by the idea
that it's FastAPI
in the back end.
Because I'm always concerned
that these things
just don't scale.
Like, you're going to build it
and it's awesome
for 100 people,
but then if it ever
becomes popular,
then it's a bad idea.
You know,
it just doesn't take it.
That's a big reason also
why we built our website
as this is kind of
the leading edge,
cutting edge Reflex app.
Like, hopefully,
in terms of features
and number of traffic,
like,
it's tested our framework
a lot in terms
of like improvements.
I'm sure that it has.
All right.
Let's talk for a moment,
for a few moments maybe,
about what the programming
model looks like.
Just keep in mind,
most people listening
can't see what
we're talking about,
but nonetheless,
let's just give people
a sense of what it's like
to write code in this, okay?
So if you go to
Reflex.dev
and scroll down,
like, just have a page
or something,
there's a little
tab thing
across the top here
that has
how do you create a form,
how do you create a chatbot,
how do you create
an image gen,
and, you know,
this thing's pretty cool.
It says,
what do you want to see?
And all this stuff is live, right?
So I could write here
and type,
I want to see a bunny.
And within just a moment,
boom,
there's a bunny
running on,
what was it?
I don't remember
where I saw it.
Running on Flux, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, Flux,
here it is.
Fluxchnell.
Fast.
The fast version.
It's very fast.
So it's pretty fast
compared to,
I was playing
with Mid Journey yesterday
and, you know,
that took a while
than a lot of 500 errors
and it took a while longer
than eventually
I got a picture out of it.
It was pretty cool.
You got charts
and so on.
let's maybe just talk
about this,
you know,
little,
send us a message,
put your name,
email,
and message.
What does it look like
to code up
one of these things?
Yeah,
so basically
in all these examples
you show,
the code on the right
is the entire code needed.
So it all fits
in one file.
Like,
there's no extra stuff
you need beyond that.
so if you were to copy
that and run it
in an app,
it would actually run.
And the,
yeah,
just to give people
listening to this
and there's probably
50 lines,
45 lines,
something like that
of code.
Yeah,
okay.
And so one thing
you'll notice is
it's all in one language
and in this case
even one file.
So it doesn't have
to be in one file.
Like,
you can have multi-page,
et cetera,
reflex apps.
But the kind of nice part
is the front end
and back end
can live together
in one repository.
And so normally,
you know,
people that have written
front end,
they're probably used
to either writing
React HTML tags
or, you know,
templating through
Jinja,
et cetera.
And what we kind of
do different
in reflex
is we define
your front end
as nothing but
Python functions.
So it fits in
exactly with
all the Python syntax.
You don't have to
kind of learn
a new language there.
Everything is a Python
function.
So for example,
normally when you
have a button,
rather than writing
an HTML button tag,
we have built-in
components like
rx.button
which as you call it
will create a button.
And the kind of
layout of the front end,
if you've ever
worked with React,
it's very similar
to React
or even HTML
in the sense that
you have this
nested tree structure
that kind of maps
directly to the HTML DOM.
And within there,
you can define
all your UI components.
So that kind of
is how the front end
works.
And once you define
your UI,
these Python functions
compile down to
React app in the end.
Now, the interesting
thing is how to make
this interactive.
how do you add
state to this?
So in this example,
if you want to do a form
or in the image generation,
I really want to hook
this up with my OpenAI
or my MidJourney model
to create something.
So normally in web
development,
you end up having to
write a front end,
a back end,
and a networking layer
between the two
where you set up
a FastAPI endpoint
for every single
action you want.
Then on the front end,
you're going to call
that API,
get the result by,
parse it back,
and then update your UI.
So that's the normal flow
of say even adding
one new feature.
Like if you want
to add a button
that generates an image
and shows it,
it will involve
touching like multiple files,
going through all this stuff
and hooking it together.
So one thing that we've done
in Reflex beyond,
you know,
bringing it to one language
is abstracting away
the front end,
back end networking layer.
So in Reflex,
you'll never have to write
an API call.
You never have to write
a post request,
a get request,
or any of that.
All of that is done
under the hood.
So to set up
your kind of state
and interactive,
you can do this all
within what we call
a state class.
So a state class
is just a normal Python class
and within it,
you define all the fields
in your state
that can change over time,
which we call vars,
as well as any event handlers
that can change the vars.
So an event handler
is just a Python
like function or method.
And I think the image gen
is a good example of it.
So for example,
in the image gen,
the image URL is a var
because it's something
that's going to change.
And an event handler
would be the get image function,
which is a function
that when they hit submit
on the input,
we call it.
So in order to hook up
the front end and back end,
all you have to do
is hook up the UI
to the Python function.
So you can say
button on click
equals state dot get image.
And what this does
under the hood
is when you click that button,
it creates an event.
it sends up
through a WebSocket
to the back end.
It will run your Python function
on the back end.
So whether that's
your OpenAI,
your replicate,
whatever it is,
all their state
runs on the back end
on the server.
And that's what allows us
to keep the state
in pure Python.
So it will update
your state UI.
In this case,
it's going to update
the image URL
and send that back.
And it works
very similar to React
in the sense that
as your state updates,
the front end
updates reactively.
Yeah,
that's super cool.
kind of just
two-way data binding
on the values there.
Exactly,
yeah.
Yeah.
All right,
so you just said
something interesting
that there's
the Next.js
React front end
and the FastAPI back end.
But you didn't say
it's calling HTTP APIs.
You said it's using
WebSockets.
Yes.
What's the deal there?
Why WebSockets
and not Pydantic
over HTTP or something?
No,
it's a really good question.
And I think this is,
like,
and a lot of people ask us,
you know,
how is Reflex's performance?
Or what are the downsides
of Reflex?
Like,
what's the catch?
Because up to now,
we've been saying,
you know,
we can perform,
create anything you can do
in JavaScript,
anything you can do
in React.
So a lot of people
are kind of asked
about the performance
and we kind of made
design Reflex
to be really performant
in everything we do.
And the reason we use
WebSockets
is because Reflex apps,
especially,
like,
very stateful apps,
often need to make
a bunch of requests.
So rather than having
to reestablish
a new HTTP request
every time,
by keeping a WebSocket,
we are really able
to optimize
the speed of the apps.
So when you create,
when you kind of send,
type your prompt,
say you want a bunny
and you press enter.
I changed it to a fast bunny,
by the way,
because you said
the WebSocket was fast.
Now we have a fast bunny.
So when you want
that fast bunny,
it will create
a little event
that says,
hey,
this guy wants to call
get image
and he typed fast bunny.
It'll take that little payload,
send it through the WebSocket
that's already been established,
run the Python function
on the backend
and then send
only the state delta back.
So for example,
if you have a really large app
with hundreds of pages
and hundreds of states,
changing this
is not going to say,
hey, front end,
this is their entire new state.
We only send the diffs
and stuff back
over the WebSocket.
So all of this
was done
in the name of performance
and making Reflex app
really snappy
for whatever you're doing.
Oh, interesting.
So in a sense,
the Python code
that I write,
even though there's
this React bit,
some of it still lives
on the backend.
Yeah.
And then some of it
gets kind of mirrored
to React
on the front end.
Is that right?
Yeah.
And I think this,
this is something,
especially like
as people are learning Reflex,
like one of the things
we try to emphasize most,
which is,
though it's all in one file,
it's all in Python,
there still is
a distinction
between the front end
and backend
because of this fact
that the front end
compiles to Next.js app
while the backend
is a FastAPI.
So in this case,
it's pretty much
all the UI code,
right,
like what's inside
the index function.
That's your Next.js react app.
Your FastAPI
is pretty much your state
and your event handlers.
So within there,
you can keep everything
in pure Python,
use anything you want.
The one thing you can't,
you can't do
and we can't do
is compile arbitrary Python
to JavaScript.
So that's the reason
all the event handlers
run on the server
so you can use
any library,
anything you want.
And on the front end,
we only compile
kind of a static website.
So there's no logic
that ever happens
on the front end, actually.
Yeah, okay.
Just updating the bindings
and triggering events.
It's like a dumb UI.
It's like,
give me the state,
I'm going to show the state.
Okay.
Well,
that's definitely
a nice bunny.
So one thing
that I think
is notable here,
and I've seen this
in other frameworks
as well.
Like, for example,
I had,
PuePy
on Talk Python
recently,
which is also
sort of React stuff
on the front end.
But this is a lot more,
PuePy is more
running,
I think,
React type stuff
almost in
PyScript,
I believe.
which is interesting,
right?
But one of the things
that I think you find
with a lot of these
is the shape
of the code
matches the DOM
a lot of times,
or at least
the conceptual idea
of the hierarchy
of the UI, right?
So for example,
here you've got
a VStag
with a skeleton
with a flex,
and then
you start putting
forms,
and in the forms,
and all of this,
every word that I said
there is another level
of indentation,
and you indent,
and you get a React
input,
and a React button,
and you unindent
Python style,
right?
And I think
it makes it
pretty easy
to think about,
here's the code,
here's the UI,
because the shape
of the code
matches the concept,
it mirrors the UI
in some ways,
right?
And rather than
just pure,
you know,
top to bottom,
imperative,
we're just generating
the UI,
but actually,
the way it's structured,
kind of like Flutter,
it looks like
it matches it,
you know?
Yeah,
so I think
there's kind of
two approaches
people in this space
have taken
to a building.
One is imperative,
which is kind of
what you said,
and I think,
for example,
Streamlit has taken
this approach
where to do a button,
you would do like
ST heading,
ST button,
and it will implicitly,
like kind of magically
put it into its thing,
and I think it could be
good for simple stuff,
but it's really hard
to reason about
as your thing gets larger,
because you have to
kind of contextualize,
wait,
has this been called already?
Like,
what order is everything going?
Is the button
in this group,
or is it outside
of the group?
Yeah,
stuff like that,
right?
Yeah,
so I think it's nice
in some sense,
but I don't think
it scales very well,
especially like conceptually,
like it's hard to kind of
reason about
what all you've kind of built,
so I think,
I guess going back
to like why it's
in this structure,
it's like this is already
kind of the natural structure,
right,
from HTML,
from React,
and I think a lot of,
as we're going through stuff
related to API design,
we try to improve the API
where we can,
but a lot of the times
we realize,
you know,
the people that did it
originally had a good idea,
like,
and there's a reason
it's kind of the standard.
Yeah,
for sure.
I think it takes a little
getting used to,
to be honest,
to see such nested stuff,
but I do like it,
I think it's good.
Yeah,
and I think part of it,
I think in this example,
we kind of nested it
just to show,
you know,
it's all in one function,
but in a more practical setting,
you would break this up
into different components,
so similar to React,
you probably wouldn't have
a giant nested thing,
and you can think of
each of those things
as units that you work with.
Yeah.
Also,
like,
decorators help a lot
with,
like,
making dynamic components
on the fly
in terms of functionality.
Yeah,
yeah.
All right,
let's talk about
just a couple more things
while we're here.
I got,
I want to talk about
the components,
and the components
are these building block pieces,
like,
maybe pick just a couple
you think highlights
the idea of these things
and we can talk about them.
Yeah,
so I guess a really big thing
people use this for
is kind of,
like,
tables and graphing,
so maybe if you go down
to the tables section,
the AG Grid one
might be a good one,
so this is actually
a good example
of a third-party component,
so you can see
we have our built-in components,
but a lot of our
enterprise users
really wanted this
AG Grid feature,
which is one of the most
popular kind of table libraries,
so we make it really easy.
This is an example
of a third-party library
someone's wrapped
that you can kind of bring in,
and this is an easy way
to kind of showcase your data,
so a lot of data scientists,
et cetera,
use this library.
It can hook up
with your data frames
and kind of show this.
So this is another example
showcasing kind of
the flexibility of
you want that random react library,
even if it's not in Reflex,
like,
the team or external contributor
often wraps this easily,
and,
yeah,
the kind of nice part
about it is
it's more high-level.
It has a lot of these
built-in features
like pagination,
searching,
sorting,
and all these,
so,
you know,
I think it's this balance,
right?
Like,
we can give people
the raw components,
like,
you can code everything
in HTML,
you can build everything
from the ground up yourself,
or you can use
this kind of high-level thing,
and the nice part
about Reflex
is you can kind of
approach it at any level
that you want,
so it's like,
I want this nice built-in thing
that has sorting pagination,
here it is,
or you're like,
you know,
I'm just going to build
everything from the ground up.
I want my own table component.
We also give you
the tools to do that,
so I think it just kind of
shows the scale
at which you can kind of
pick your level of abstraction
as you're using it.
Yeah,
then you just pip install
the name of the thing,
and then just use it
like a native component,
right?
Exactly,
and it will act
as if,
like all other Reflex components,
so there's nothing like,
distinct between our components
and something you would
wrap yourself.
So if I was
a reasonably sized company
with a team of,
maybe many of them
knowing React,
it might make sense
for me to build out
an internal library
of widgets
that we use on our app
and plug in
to Reflex,
something like that?
Definitely,
and to that point,
like we have a whole guide
on our website
on wrapping React
with different examples,
and we're trying
to make it accessible
for Python developers,
so because that's
our user at the end,
right?
So we wanted
to make it accessible
for even a non-JavaScript,
non-React expert
to be able
to wrap these components.
So we've seen
in different companies,
like I kind of mentioned
earlier,
that have their internal,
you know,
component systems
in React.
A Python developer
was easily able
to kind of wrap these
because we make it
super easy to wrap
as just a Python class
where you just
define the props.
So maybe if you go
to the wrapping React
section on the left-hand side,
it's kind of at the,
maybe go back
to the main docs section.
But yeah,
we try to make it
really easy
to bring your own
components as well.
So whether you already
have one
or you want to make
your own,
so this is like
a spline one,
and you can see
all you have to do
is list all the props.
It's a Python class.
You kind of have
to just go find
what library,
what NPM library
you're using,
list all the props,
and for interactive ones,
you may have to define that,
and then you can start
using it right away.
Nice.
So as part of your component,
you define just basically
the NPM thing to install
or whatever,
and then off it goes.
Yeah,
and Reflex will handle,
it'll install the component,
it will wrap it for you,
and it will compile out for you.
Yeah,
very cool.
All right,
I said three things.
One was components.
The other is this AI generator,
and then I want to just talk
about the roadmap.
So let's,
I'm getting short on time here,
so let's go and talk
about this FlexGen thing.
This is build web apps
at the speed of thought,
create UIs with Reflex framework
with simple prompting.
So maybe I want a podcast hosting website
in the style of Talk Python to me.
Nice.
Oh, no.
Here, let's go to this one.
Yeah, try to refresh
and run it one more time.
All right.
So this is in beta.
Like,
we're kind of released it
on our Discord,
and we're going to do
more releases,
but this version of it
is similar to,
if you've seen,
like, v0.dev from Vercel,
this is kind of,
I'd say,
like a version of v0 for Reflex
where you can,
it's a web editor,
you can enter your prompt,
it's going to live stream
your output.
At the end of it,
it's going to give you the code
that you can copy into your app,
and you can start adding
a back end to it.
So I guess an important note
is this is more for,
like, your starter app,
right,
like,
when you're first starting
your project,
and you want to get,
like,
a good starting point.
Yeah,
we'll fix that.
It made such a nice one
for me before.
Let's see.
Anyway.
But the idea of this one
is to be kind of a web editor
to get your app kind of started
building out from.
And this is kind of
just a version of v0
for Python.
So this is level one
of what we're building
with FlexGen.
But a more interesting thing
that we're developing now
internally
and are hoping to release
in the next month
is a local version of this.
So this has no context
of your existing code base.
It has no context
of what you're building, right?
So you could ask it
to build a little component.
But a big issue
with v0
and other of these
web developers
is how do I actually
integrate this
into an existing app?
Like,
it's good at building
brand new stuff,
but how do I, like,
update an existing app?
So on this front,
we're building
a local AI toolbar,
which has a lot
of these agentic features
around Reflex,
but on your local.
So, for example,
the features we have there
are you can click a button
and say,
when I click the button,
do this,
or click a text
and say,
change, like,
you know,
put a form under this text.
And the big idea there,
I think this is a good
first start,
but I think in the long run,
I see the toolbar
as being this way
where the AI
and the developer
kind of integrate together
with Python
as the common language.
So for crazy stuff
that you don't want
to deal with,
like make a form
that works in mobile view,
et cetera,
the AI can handle
a lot of this,
but once it outputs,
it outputs code
that you can actually
go understand and read.
Like, it's not this
obfuscated JavaScript
or React code.
It's code that you can
go edit by hand
if you want.
And you can easily
hook up your own state
and data to it, right?
Which is a big other thing
I think other frameworks
miss, which is,
here's a great dashboard.
Great, but it's all fake data.
Like, how do I actually
make it hook up
with my clicks,
hook up with my different data?
So that's a big part
of what we're trying
to bring
to the local environment.
Yeah, that's cool.
And so this thing
will generate a visual
look and feel thing
and you actually
go show the code.
It's all fake data.
Yeah, yeah, of course.
And then you can show the code
and then right now
you can kind of copy the code
and start using it
in Reflex.
And then with the toolbar,
you'll then be able
to make incremental upgrades
on top of this
rather than starting
from scratch.
And that will have
like full context.
And on top of that,
we're aiming to build
a lot of stuff
on top
beyond, you know,
just prompting
and updating.
Like there's a lot
of improvements
that we want to build
on top of that as well.
Yeah, cool.
All right, well,
this is pretty neat.
I like it.
It definitely gives you
some ideas for
here's some possible layouts
and so on
and gives you
at least a little bit
of an idea
of what you might want
to do and take it
and run with it.
So that's helpful.
Yeah, I think some ideas
we have in the future
for the local
are, you know,
buttons that can,
you know,
keep your same content,
show you different variations
like auto-style it,
et cetera.
Like a lot of stuff
that people don't want
to deal with,
but they're like,
just give me some ideas
and how it could look
and turn people more
into like, you know,
prompters and selectors
rather than implementers.
Yeah, cool.
All right,
let's close it out
with the roadmap.
Where are we going?
Awesome.
So recently
we just released
Reflex 0.6
last month
and right now
we're going after 0.7.
So a big part
of 0.7
is cleaning up
a lot of our
core components
that we have,
especially for the
features people use
the most.
So the ones
we're starting off
with are,
like you can see here,
AG grid support,
which is a big thing
people asked,
and beyond that,
just like very good support
with tables,
databases,
and graphing
to help a lot
of these internal apps
and data science
use cases.
Beyond that,
like one really
important thing
for web frameworks
that we're trying
to build is auth,
so built-in auth.
So if anyone's
ever used Django,
you know,
they have a really
great kind of way
that you can plug
any auth system in,
and that's often
the first thing
someone wants
in a practical web app,
right?
They're like,
I have,
especially a data app,
they're like,
I have this great app,
but I don't want anyone
to be able to access it,
and we already have
integrations
with third-party auth providers,
but we want to bring
in just like
first-party auth
where you can just
add a click of a button,
your website is going
to have auth
at this point.
A lot of these,
the other stuff here
is really
related to a lot
of performance improvements
that we're going to make,
so one key feature
of Reflex
is the development experience,
so one part of that
is code,
but the other part
is things like
hot reload
and how fast is it
for me to actually
make iterations
on what I'm doing,
so a lot of these
other tickets
are internal changes
we're going to do
to make it easier
for pretty much
improve the hot reload times,
so we wanted people
to improve their
iteration speed a lot.
A lot of time,
people,
like pretty much
all their time
should be spent
looking at actions
and coding
and not waiting
for anything.
And then one final thing
related to kind of
how we want to simplify
the approach
of UI and state
is we're implementing
a system called CSR,
which is kind of,
right now,
I kind of mentioned
there's this difference
between compile time
and run time,
and there's certain things,
your entire UI
kind of needs to be
known at compile time,
so you have to compile
your code,
and that's what you get
at run time.
And what we're
introducing is
this idea of dynamic
components,
which are dynamics
generated at run time,
so this will enable
really cool use cases.
For example,
you can have a chat bot
that instead of just
returning text all the time,
it could return components,
so it could return a graph,
it could return
a whole Reflex page,
and these could be
components that
you don't know up front
and are actually generated
during run time,
so it's going to help a lot
in terms of flexibility
and also in terms of,
you know,
the ease of use
in using Reflex,
because since they're
generated at run time,
you can now use pure Python.
You don't have any limitations,
and there's a lot of advantages
on the developer side as well.
Yeah, that's very cool.
So, yeah,
this is on the open source,
and we're also,
like I mentioned,
releasing some of our AI features,
and the biggest thing, though,
is we're releasing our first version
of our hosting service.
Our hosting service
has been in beta
for some time right now,
but along with all this,
we're releasing our first
kind of paid version
of our hosting service,
and, yeah,
getting people on apps
onboarded onto there
is coming up,
so I'm really excited for that.
Yeah.
Well, it looks good.
The web app framework
looks really nice,
so I'm sure it'll help
a lot of people.
Awesome.
Yeah.
All right, guys.
One final parting thought
from each of you.
You want to go?
Yeah, I can go.
I think one of the fun things
that I've experienced
with working here
is that even when I'm
writing our docs,
some people have never
interfaced with props before,
and so Reflex, in a way,
is like a bridge
to the web ecosystem.
So it's been fun
thinking about
what are the mental models
that I can take in Python
to help explain things
that are in web,
and it's like,
how can you bring those in
and then create pathways?
Yeah, there's not a lot
of event-driven stuff
in Python,
but so much of the web
is event-driven.
Yeah.
It's callbacks and stuff.
I guess for me,
I think I'm just excited
about thinking about
new kind of user interfaces,
both in terms of
coding APIs
and actual user interfaces
that people are going
to be able to build upcoming.
I think the current
web frameworks,
the Djangoes and Flask,
they've been around
for a long time,
and I think they have
a lot of great stuff,
but there's also
a lot of new stuff
that I think a next generation
of web frameworks
could add
to accelerate a lot of work,
and I'm just excited
about thinking of
what are those features,
like how can we accelerate
while keeping the good stuff
that's already been
discovered before,
and yeah,
I think there's,
especially now,
a lot more people
are building,
are becoming builders
and sharing,
so I'm excited
about empowering
all those people.
Yeah, absolutely.
There's a lot of abstractions
to think through
in terms of
how can we create guarantees
that can enable someone
to be successful
in the long term,
especially when it comes
to building apps
that can serve
hopefully millions of people
and millions of traffic,
but then also being flexible enough
that they can still start easily.
Yeah, that's a challenge,
and there's a lot of places
that are struggling
with those challenges
or trying to solve them.
look at AWS.
Just go to the services
tab of AWS, right?
That place serves tons of people,
but boy,
is it complicated
to look at the 100
or whatever services
and decide what you need
and how they go together, right?
Yeah.
We have system initiative
now, though,
so that's going to be
huge value add.
Yeah, I think in one way,
I think we're on an effort
to just simplify this whole thing
and just make it really easy
for more people to build.
Yeah, it's a good mission.
All right.
Nikhil, Elvis,
thanks for being on the show.
Talk to you guys later.
Thanks so much.
Bye.
Peace.
Thank you.